docs/06-examples/index.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Examples
nav_order: 6
has_children: true
description: "Complete Utah script examples for learning and reference"
permalink: /examples/
---

This section contains complete, working Utah script examples that demonstrate various features and use cases. Each example includes both the Utah source code (`.shx`) and explanations of the concepts being demonstrated.

## Available Examples

### 🏥 [System Health Monitor](system-health-monitor)

A comprehensive DevOps automation script demonstrating advanced Utah features including log analysis, performance monitoring, user management, and CI/CD pipeline monitoring.

### 🔍 [Server Health Check](health-check)

A practical server monitoring script that performs health checks, logs issues, and executes automatic recovery procedures.

### 🧵 [String Processing](string-processing)

A tutorial on string manipulation using Utah's powerful string functions for cleaning, formatting, and validating data.

### 📚 [Array Operations](arrays)

A comprehensive guide to working with arrays in Utah, including creation, access, iteration, and built-in array methods.

### 🔄 [Loops and Iteration](loops)

Examples of for loops, for-in loops, and array iteration patterns in Utah.

### 🎯 [Switch Statements](switch-case)

Conditional logic examples using switch/case statements with various data types.

## How to Use These Examples

1. **Copy the code:** Each example page contains the complete `.shx` source code
2. **Save as `.shx` file:** Create a new file with the `.shx` extension
3. **Compile and run:** Use `utah compile filename.shx` to generate bash script
4. **Execute:** Run the generated `.sh` file or use `utah run filename.shx`

## Contributing Examples

Have a great Utah script example? We'd love to include it! See our [contributing guidelines](../01-getting-started/contributing.md) for information on how to submit examples.

---

**Note:** All examples are tested and verified to work with the latest version of Utah. If you encounter any issues, please check that you're using the most recent version of the Utah CLI.

Commit message:

refactor: replace references to deprecated array examples with log file analyzer documentation

docs/06-examples/index.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Examples
nav_order: 6
has_children: true
description: "Complete Utah script examples for learning and reference"
permalink: /examples/
---

This section contains complete, working Utah script examples that demonstrate various features and use cases. Each example includes both the Utah source code (`.shx`) and explanations of the concepts being demonstrated.

## Available Examples

### 🏥 [System Health Monitor](system-health-monitor)

A comprehensive DevOps automation script demonstrating advanced Utah features including log analysis, performance monitoring, user management, and CI/CD pipeline monitoring.

### 🔍 [Server Health Check](health-check)

A practical server monitoring script that performs health checks, logs issues, and executes automatic recovery procedures.

### 🧵 [String Processing](string-processing)

A tutorial on string manipulation using Utah's powerful string functions for cleaning, formatting, and validating data.

### 📚 [Log File Analyzer](log-file-analyzer)

A comprehensive guide to working with arrays in Utah through a practical log file analyzer, including creation, access, iteration, and built-in array methods.

### 🔄 [Loops and Iteration](loops)

Examples of for loops, for-in loops, and array iteration patterns in Utah.

### 🎯 [Switch Statements](switch-case)

Conditional logic examples using switch/case statements with various data types.

## How to Use These Examples

1. **Copy the code:** Each example page contains the complete `.shx` source code
2. **Save as `.shx` file:** Create a new file with the `.shx` extension
3. **Compile and run:** Use `utah compile filename.shx` to generate bash script
4. **Execute:** Run the generated `.sh` file or use `utah run filename.shx`

## Contributing Examples

Have a great Utah script example? We'd love to include it! See our [contributing guidelines](../01-getting-started/contributing.md) for information on how to submit examples.

---

**Note:** All examples are tested and verified to work with the latest version of Utah. If you encounter any issues, please check that you're using the most recent version of the Utah CLI.
